FEN 6k1/pp3ppp/8/3p4/8/4P3/PP3PPP/6K1 w - - 0 1

The first structure that you will be seeing a lot in this course, especially the ...d5-themed opening systems, such as the Queen's Gambit Declined, the Slav, possibly the Queen's Indian, is, of course, the positions where we fight the Isolated Queen's Pawn.

This pawn structure is one of the most well-researched in chess, with multiple great sources covering it: for example, the famous book of Rioz on pawn structures comes to mind.

While I do not aspire to suggest some ground-breaking new ideas, it is important that we are familiar with the basic plans in this position, and the pros and cons of an isolated pawn.

The good things for Black are:

1) The isolated pawn gives him more space;
2) It helps Black control the e4 and c4-squares, which is rather helpful in the middlegame: for example, the knight would enjoy itself on e4;
3) It makes smooth and easy piece play possible.

For example, had that pawn been on e6, the c8-bishop could be restricted, while with the isolated pawn, the bishop can easily come out to g4.

4) There are two semi-open files, c and e, which Black can use for his rooks.

However, there are also significant downsides of a position with an IQP. What are they?

The isolated pawn cannot be defended by any other pawns, as it has no 'neighbors' on the c and e-files. That means in the endgame, especially in an endgame with major pieces, it will be very weak. It is not weak now, as there are too many pieces on the board, which means it's both easy to defend it, and that White needs to pay attention to other things, such as potential kingside counterplay. But, once the minor pieces are gone, the pawn will be very weak. So, don't try to win immediately, rather focus on trading pieces and winning gradually!

The square in front of the isolated pawn, in this case d4, is an outpost for the White's pieces, because no other pawn can ever disturb the White piece, typically the knight, sitting on d4. Of course, with a central square like this one being available, whichever piece gets there usually ends up very powerful. So, in brief, as White we are looking to trade pieces, eliminate dynamic counterplay and win in the endgame. Reviewed this? Now, solve the puzzle by scrolling forward.
1.Kf1
